---
layout: post
title: Is Radical Longevity Technology Values-Aligned?
subtitle: By William James
tags: [Technology, Values, Humanity, Longevity]
# Is Radical Longevity Technology Values-Aligned?

Whether one chooses to believe me or not, I have some fun designs for a cellular reprogramming technology. If it is successfully created such technology can drive clean meat, tissue engineering, cancer vaccines, cognitive decline treatments and radical longevity solutions. The most interesting application of this technology to me is radical longevity and is the most immediate use case that I’d like to engineer this technology for. Are my foolish ambitions and technology designs a curse or a blessing? Will I risk dooming humanity with my innovation like the fathers of the atom-bomb? If I possess the ability to solve crises of cellular identity, do I also possess the ability to solve the crises of social identity? With absolutely zero social credibility and overconfidence in the success of my designs, I am burdened with these philosophical  questions. In the last article I presented a model of assessing whether or not a technology is values aligned. This article will apply that framework for assessing if radical life-extension is aligned with the existential needs of humanity.

How does radical longevity impact the incentive-deterrent landscape of humanity? Functionally radical life-extension means taking the domain of time by which one is alive and increasing it. This could confer an immediate additional 20, 50, 100 or 1000 years off life. Factoring in potential for continuous innovation in the longevity space after the initial life-span increase, this could yield biological immortality. From the rational self-interest perspective, this incentivises individuals to act according to their own radically long-term well being. 

Biological longevity does not directly translate to individual immortality. If the planet is wiped out in nuclear war, the individuals remaining ten thousand years are wasted. If short-sighted finance-lawyer capitalists consume all low-density fuels in pursuit of profits, they prevent humanity's inner-planetary potential. If humanity is stranded on earth until the sun implodes, then so is the individual with radical longevity. More immediately if humanity dies to the destruction of earth's habitable environment, then so does the individual. If the individual’s nation dies in a proxy war between the humanists and the extinctionists, then so does that individual.

Now we understand why the nihilistically clever refer to immortality as a curse. Betting on their individual demise, they act in short-sighted ways that doom humanity’s future. Biological immortality means that corrupt people must either redeem themselves, else they will have to one day pay the piper.  

If the individual is to redeem oneself, under the incentive of self-preservation, then they must also aim for the redemption of others. If others are functionally senescent or cancerous, then they present opportunity cost. The socially senescent consuming resources and providing no positive return on humanity’s investment. The socially cancerous consume resources at increasing rates and actively deter humanity from its potential, else their identities would be eliminated. With radical longevity the incentive deterrent landscape shifts to include solving for not only for one’s long-term self, but instrumentally for humanity as they represent potentially cooperative agents for solving one’s continuous set of problems.
Having the incentive to account for the long-term well-being of humanity does not mean that one has the ability to do so. Radical life-extension does little to improve the strategic decision making abilities of the individual. Indirectly it incentives individuals to reach their developmental potential or to participate in coordination systems that allow them to emulate it. Unless one can calculate an evolutionarily stable strategy, then they are bound by the coordination systems of their environment. Therefore radical longevity will incentivise the design and use of both development and emulation systems that account for the long-term large-scale well-being of humanity.

In terms of augmenting individual agency, radical longevity does little. In-terms of first-order effects it allows individuals to be on more equal playing fields in-terms of their health, regardless of their age. Its primary impact is the higher-order impact of incentivising individuals to increase their agency as the more ability they have to adapt across the future, the more they will likely enjoy it.

To conclude, radical longevity presents itself primarily as an incentive-deterrent alignment technology. If it is to avoid capture by the corrupt forces of moloch, then it must be deployed alongside technologies that improve the individual’s decision making and increase the individual agency to execute on wisdom. What technologies, scientific or social, could be implemented alongside radical longevity to account for these weaknesses and avoid its corruption?



